feat: Add support for TS config files (#18134)
eslint/eslint: docs/src/use/configure/configuration-files.md

* `eslint.config.js`
* `eslint.config.mjs`
* `eslint.config.cjs`
* `eslint.config.ts` (requires [additional setup](#typescript-configuration-files))
* `eslint.config.mts` (requires [additional setup](#typescript-configuration-files))

> * `eslint.config.cts` requires [additional setup](#typescript-configuration-files))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `eslint.config.cts` (requires [additional setup](#typescript-configuration-files))
```

> * `eslint.config.ts` (Requires [TypeScript Setup](#experimental-typescript-support))
> * `eslint.config.mts` (Requires [TypeScript Setup](#experimental-typescript-support))
> * `eslint.config.cts` (Requires [TypeScript Setup](#experimental-typescript-support))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `eslint.config.ts` (requires [additional setup](#typescript-configuration-files))
* `eslint.config.mts` (requires [additional setup](#typescript-configuration-files))
* `eslint.config.cts` requires [additional setup](#typescript-configuration-files))
```

```

In this case, ESLint does not search for `eslint.config.js` and instead uses `some-other-file.js`.

## TypeScript Configuration Files

::: warning
This feature is currently experimental and may change in future versions.
:::

> To enable TypeScript configuration files, you must install the optional dev dependency [`jiti`](https://github.com/unjs/jiti) in your project.

Reviewer 2: I suppose we should also point out that this step is unnecessary except in Node.js. So maybe something more like this:
```suggestion
For Deno and Bun, TypeScript configuration files are natively supported; for Node.js, you must install the optional dev dependency [`jiti`](https://github.com/unjs/jiti) in your project (this dependency is not automatically installed by ESLint):
```

```bash
npm install -D jiti
# or
yarn add --dev jiti
# or
pnpm add -D jiti
```

> You can then create a configuration file with the `.ts`, `.mts`, or `.cts` extension and export an array of [configuration objects](#configuration-objects). Here's an example:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then create a configuration file with a `.ts`, `.mts`, or `.cts` extension, and export an array of [configuration objects](#configuration-objects). Here's an example in ESM format:

```

```ts
import js from "@eslint/js";
import type { Linter } from "eslint";

export default [
  js.configs.recommended,
  {
    rules: {
      "no-console": [0],
    },
  },
] satisfies Linter.FlatConfig[];
```

> with an `eslint.config.cts` file (CJS):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's an example in CommonJS format:
```

```ts
import type { Linter } from "eslint";
const eslint = require("@eslint/js");

const config: Linter.FlatConfig[] = [
  eslint.configs.recommended,
  {
    rules: {
      "no-console": [0],
    },
  },
];

module.exports = config;
```

> with an `eslint.config.mts` file (ESM):
> 
> ```ts
> import eslint from "@eslint/js";
> import type { Linter } from "eslint";
> 
> const config: Linter.FlatConfig[] = [
>   eslint.configs.recommended,
>   {
>     rules: {
>       "no-console": [0],
>     },
>   },
> ];
> 
> export default config;
> ```

Reviewer 2: We don't need this example.
```suggestion
```

> ### Important Notes
> 
> * **Type Checking**: ESLint does not perform any type checking on the configuration file.
> * **`tsconfig.json` Ignored**: Your local `tsconfig.json` file does not influence how the configuration file is loaded.

Reviewer 2: I think we can represent this better:
```suggestion
::: important
ESLint does not perform type checking on your configuration file and does not apply any settings from `tsconfig.json`.
:::
```

> * **Runtime Support**: If you are using a runtime that supports TypeScript natively, such as [`Bun`](https://bun.sh) or
> [`Deno`](`https://deno.com`), ESLint will defer loading the configuration file to the runtime.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this if we add mention further update (see my previous comment)
```suggestion
```

### Configuration File Precedence

If you have multiple ESLint configuration files, ESLint prioritizes JavaScript files over TypeScript files. The order of precedence is as follows:

> 1. **`eslint.config.js`**
> 2. **`eslint.config.mjs`**
> 3. **`eslint.config.cjs`**
> 4. **`eslint.config.ts`**
> 5. **`eslint.config.mts`**
> 6. **`eslint.config.cts`**

Reviewer 2: No need for these to be bold
```suggestion
1. `eslint.config.js`
2. `eslint.config.mjs`
3. `eslint.config.cjs`
4. `eslint.config.ts`
5. `eslint.config.mts`
6. `eslint.config.cts`
```

To override this behavior, use the `--config` or `-c` command line option to specify a different configuration file:

```bash
npx eslint --config eslint.config.ts
```

> ### Summary
> 
> You can now write your ESLint configuration files in TypeScript by following these steps:
> 
> 1. Install [`jiti`](https://github.com/unjs/jiti) in your project.
> 
> ```bash
> # NPM
> npm install --save-dev jiti
> 
> # Yarn
> yarn add --dev jiti
> 
> #PNPM
> pnpm add --save-dev jiti
> ```
> 
> 2. Create an `eslint.config.ts`, `eslint.config.mts`, or `eslint.config.cts` file.
> 
> ```bash
> touch eslint.config.ts
> ```
> 
> 3. Export an array of [configuration objects](#configuration-objects) from the file.
> 
> ```ts
> import eslint from "@eslint/js";
> import type { Linter } from "eslint";
> 
> const config: Linter.FlatConfig[] = [
>   eslint.configs.recommended,
>   {
>     rules: {
>       "no-console": [0],
>     },
>   },
> ];
> 
> export default config;
> ```

Reviewer 2: No need to duplicate the content here.
```suggestion
```

```

In this case, ESLint does not search for `eslint.config.js` and instead uses `some-other-file.js`.

> <a name="experimental-typescript-support">
> 
> ## ◆ Configuration Files written in TypeScript (new)
> 
> </a>

Reviewer 2: Heading are automatically turned into links, and we don't use the diamond in any other headings.
```suggestion
## TypeScript Configuration Files
```

> As of ESLint v9.x, you can write your ESLint configuration files in [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org).
> 

Reviewer 2: This isn't necessary.
```suggestion

```

::: warning
This feature is currently experimental and may change in future versions.
:::

> To use this feature, you must have [`jiti`](https://github.com/unjs/jiti) installed in your project.

Reviewer 2: Let's explain a little more.
```suggestion
To enable TypeScript configuration files, you must install the optional dev dependency [`jiti`](https://github.com/unjs/jiti) in your project.
```

> NPM
> 
> ```bash
> npm install --save-dev jiti
> ```
> 
> Yarn
> 
> ```bash
> yarn add --dev jiti
> ```
> 
> PNPM
> 
> ```bash
> pnpm add --save-dev jiti
> ```

Reviewer 2: We can tighten this up.
```suggestion

````bash
npm install jiti -D
# or
yarn add --dev jiti
# or
pnpm add jiti -D
````
```

```

In this case, ESLint does not search for `eslint.config.js` and instead uses `some-other-file.js`.

<a name="experimental-typescript-support">

## ◆ Configuration Files written in TypeScript (new)

</a>

As of ESLint v10, you can write your ESLint configuration files in [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org).

::: warning
This feature is currently experimental and may change in future versions.
:::

> To use this feature, you must have [`jiti`](https://jiti.unjs.io) installed in your project.

Reviewer 3: (as per @ljharb comment)

```suggestion
To use this feature, you must have [`jiti`](https://github.com/unjs/jiti) installed in your project.
```

> To use this feature, you must have [`jiti`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jiti) installed in your project.

Reviewer 3: This link will be most updated one

```suggestion
To use this feature, you must have [`jiti`](https://jiti.unjs.io) installed in your project.
```

Reviewer 4: why add a dependency on this service? the npm package is canonical, and links to the github repo.

Reviewer 3: Stub for future docs website. Github link is also fine...

Reviewer 4: i mean `unjs.io` - npm and github's websites are known to be stable, things that aren't probably should be minimized

NPM

```bash
npm install --save-dev jiti
```

Yarn

```bash
yarn add --dev jiti
```

PNPM

```bash
pnpm add --save-dev jiti
```

You can then create a configuration file with the `.ts`, `.mts`, or `.cts` extension and export an array of [configuration objects](#configuration-objects). Here's an example:

```ts
import eslint from "@eslint/js"
import type { Linter } from "eslint"

export default [
  eslint.configs.recommended,
  {
    rules: {
      "no-console": [0],
    },
  },
] satisfies Linter.FlatConfig[]
```

with an `eslint.config.cts` file (CJS):

```ts
import type { Linter } from "eslint"

> const eslint = require("@eslint/js")

Author: I mostly did that to showcase that they can use CJS syntax if they choose to do so.

```ts
import eslint from "@eslint/js"
import type { Linter } from "eslint"

const config: Linter.FlatConfig[] = [
  eslint.configs.recommended,
  {
    rules: {
      "no-console": [0],
    },
  },
]

export default config
```

### Important Notes

* **Type Checking**: ESLint does not perform any type checking on the configuration file.
* **`tsconfig.json` Ignored**: Your local `tsconfig.json` file does not influence how the configuration file is loaded.
* **Runtime Support**: If you are using a runtime that supports TypeScript natively, such as [`Bun`](https://bun.sh) or
[`Deno`](`https://deno.com`), ESLint will defer loading the configuration file to the runtime.

### Configuration File Precedence

If you have multiple ESLint configuration files, ESLint prioritizes JavaScript files over TypeScript files. The order of precedence is as follows:

1. **`eslint.config.js`**
2. **`eslint.config.mjs`**
3. **`eslint.config.cjs`**
4. **`eslint.config.ts`**
5. **`eslint.config.mts`**
6. **`eslint.config.cts`**

To override this behavior, use the `--config` or `-c` command line option to specify a different configuration file:

```bash
npx eslint --config eslint.config.ts
```

::: warning

> As of now, [`jiti`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jiti) does not support [Top-level `await`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await#top_level_await)

Reviewer 3: (it is probably worth to wait and adopt jiti v2 directly for this, many other edge-cases would be solved too)

Author: @pi0 Awesome, can't wait. Thank you so much for all you do for us!

:::

### Summary

You can now write your ESLint configuration files in TypeScript by following these steps:

> 1. Install [`jiti`](https://jiti.unjs.io) in your project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Install [`jiti`](https://github.com/unjs/jiti) in your project.
```

> 1. Install [`jiti`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jiti) in your project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Install [`jiti`](https://jiti.unjs.io) in your project.
```

```

In this case, ESLint does not search for `eslint.config.js` and instead uses `some-other-file.js`.

## TypeScript Configuration Files

::: warning

> This feature is currently experimental and may change in future versions.

Reviewer: The documentation should also explain how to enable this feature using `--flags`.
